staging/operator-registry/docs/design/opm-tooling.md, before:

# Operator Registry Tooling

When compiled, the `operator-registry` project results in a collection of tools that in aggregate define a way of packaging and delivering operator manifests to Kubernetes clusters. Historically, this is done with multiple tools. For example, you can use `initializer` to generate an immutable database and then use `registry-serve` to serve the database via an API. We have added the `opm` tool that aggregates these functions together and allows a user to interact with container images and tooling directly to generate and update registry databases in a mutable way.

The following document describes the tooling that `opm` provides along with descriptions of how to use them including each command's purpose, their inputs and outputs, and some examples.

## opm

`opm` (Operator Package Manager) is a tool that is used to generate and interact with operator-registry catalogs, both the underlying databases (generally referred to as the `registry`) and their images (the `index`). This is divided into two main commands: `registry` which is used to initialize, update and serve an API of the underlying database of manifests and references and `index` which is used to interact with an OCI container runtime to generate the registry database and package it in a container image.

### registry

`opm registry` generates and updates registry database objects.

#### add

First, let's look at adding a version of an operator bundle to a registry database.

For example:

`opm registry add -b "quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.14.0" -d "test-registry.db"`

Dissecting this command, we called `opm registry add` to pull a container image that includes the manifests for the 0.14.0 version of the `prometheus` operator. We then unpacked those manifests from the container image and attempted to insert them into the registry database `test-registry.db`. Since that database file didn't currently exist on disk, the database was initialized first and then prometheus 0.14.0 was added to the empty database.

Now imagine that the 0.15.0 version of the `prometheus operator` was just released. We can add that operator to our existing database by calling add again and pointing to the new container image:

`opm registry add -b "quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.15.0" -d "test-registry.db"`

Great! The existing `test-registry.db` file is updated. Now we have a registry that contains two versions of the operator and defines an update graph that, when added to a cluster, will signal to the Operator Lifecycle Manager that if you have already installed version `0.14.0` that `0.15.0` can be used to upgrade your installation.

#### rm

`opm` also currently supports removing entire packages from a registry.

For example:

`opm registry rm -o "prometheus" -d "test-registry.db"`

Calling this on our existing test registry removes all versions of the prometheus operator entirely from the database.

#### prune

`opm` supports specifying which packages should be kept in an operator database.

For example:

`opm registry prune -p "prometheus" -d "test-registry.db"`

Would remove all but the `prometheus` package from the operator database.

#### serve

`opm` also includes a command to connect to an existing database and serve a `gRPC` API that handles requests for data about the registry:

`opm registry serve -d "test-registry.db" -p 50051`

### index

`opm index` is, for the most part, a wrapper for `opm registry` that abstracts the underlying database interaction to instead make it easier to speak about the container images that are actually shipped to clusters directly. In particular, this makes it easy to say "given my operator index image, I want to add a new version of my operator and get an updated container image that I can automatically ship to clusters".

#### add

Index add works much the same way as registry add. For example:

`opm index add --bundles quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.14.0 --tag quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring-index:1.0.0`

Similar to `opm registry add`, this command will pull the specified container bundle and insert it into a registry. The real difference is that the result is more than just a database file. By default, this command will also attempt to build a container image and depending on the value of the `--tag` flag, will tag the output image as `quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring-index:1.0.0`. The resulting image has the database and the opm binary in it and, when run, calls the `registry serve` command on the database that was generated.

Just like registry add command, the updates are cumulative. In this case, rather than pointing at a database file, we can use the `--from-index` flag to specify a previous index to build off of a previous registry:

`opm index add --bundles quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.15.0 --from-index quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring:1.0.0 --tag quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring:1.0.1`

This results in a fresh image that includes the updated prometheus operator in the prometheus package's update graph.

At a high level, this command operates by wrapping `registry add` around some additional interaction with pulling and building container images. To that end, the last thing it does is actually shell out to a container CLI tool to build the resulting container (by default, `podman build`). It does this by generating a dockerfile and then passing that file to the shell command.

For example:

```dockerfile
FROM quay.io/operator-framework/upstream-registry-builder AS builder

FROM scratch
LABEL operators.operatorframework.io.index.database.v1=./index.db
COPY database ./
COPY --from=builder /bin/opm /opm
COPY --from=builder /bin/grpc_health_probe /bin/grpc_health_probe
EXPOSE 50051
ENTRYPOINT ["/opm"]
CMD ["registry", "serve", "--database", "index.db"]
```

In the above example, it's important to note that we use a builder image to get the latest upstream released version of opm in order to call `opm registry serve` to host the gRPC API. If a developer or CI system would prefer to point to a different version of `opm` to serve their operator (perhaps one in a private release or a fork) then they just need to deliver their own version in a container and then use the `--binary-image` command.

For example:

`opm index add --bundles quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.14.0 --tag quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring-index:1.0.0 --binary-image quay.io/$user/my-opm-source`

This will update the above dockerfile and replace the builder image with the image specified in the `--binary-image` flag.

We are aware of the fact that, in many cases, users will want to make other changes to this dockerfile (adding additional labels, adding other binaries for metrics, using a different port, etc.). For these more complex use cases, we have added the `--generate` and `--out-dockerfile` flags. Adding `--generate` will skip the container build command entirely and instead write a Dockerfile to the local filesystem. By default, this file is called `index.Dockerfile` and is put in the directory you run `opm` from. If you want to rename this generated dockerfile and write it somewhere else, just specify the `--out-dockerfile` flag:

`opm index add --bundles quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.14.0 --generate --out-dockerfile "my.Dockerfile"`

Running this command will still generate the updated registry database, but it will store it locally and additionally write `my.Dockerfile` which can be modified as needed.


#### Update Graph Generation

In an effort to make channel head selection understandable and deterministic when bulk-adding bundles to an index using `--mode=replaces` (the default), the following heuristic has been adopted: the bundles with the highest version within a package are considered the heads of the channels they belong to.

<ul>

#### Under the Hood

`opm` effectively decomposes bundle addition into three steps for each package:

1. Add bundles to the underlying data store
2. Choose the channel heads and default channel
3. Rebuild the update graph starting at the new heads

Channel head -- the "latest" operator in a channel -- selection is now informed by [semver](https://semver.org/). The heurstic is simple, the bundle with the highest version in each channel becomes the new head. The default channel is then taken from the maximum versioned bundle which defines a default channel.

Starting from these heads, opm then rebuilds the entire update graph using the edges defined by the `replaces` and `skips` CSV fields.

If a given CSV is missing a version field, all CSVs (sourced from the command's arguments) belonging package are elided from the input. Additionally, a non-zero exit code is returned from the command.
CSVs without a version (and with duplicate versions) that are already part of the index are allowed so long as there is at least one CSV with a version field in the package that we can recognize as having the maximum version.
When `--overwrite-latest` is set, all bundle in a package are deleted and passed in as "input", and thus are constrained by the rules set out in the first paragraph above; the exceptions set out in the second paragraph above do not apply, and violations cause the offending package to be excluded from the index.

#### What does this mean for a package author?

- the head of every channel will __always__ be the bundle in that channel with the highest version field defined
- a version field __must__ be defined on a bundle expected to be channel head, unless it's the only bundle in the channel

#### Common Pitfalls

- [Pre-release](https://semver.org/#spec-item-9) versions __should not__ be used as patches to channel heads; e.g. 1.0.0-p replaces 1.0.0
    - pre-release versions come _before_ their release version and consequently won't be chosen as the new channel head by opm (see https://semver.org/#spec-item-11 for more on ordering)
</ul>

#### rm

Like `opm registry rm`, this command will remove all versions an entire operator package from the index and results in a container image that does not include that package. It supports virtually all of the same options and flags as `opm index add` with the exception of replacing `--bundles` with `--operators`.

For example:

`opm index rm --operators prometheus --tag quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring-index:1.0.2 --binary-image quay.io/$user/my-opm-source`

This will result in the tagged container image `quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring-index:1.0.2` with a registry that no longer contains the `prometheus` operator at all.

#### prune

`opm index prune` allows the user to specify which operator packages should be maintained in an index.

For example:

`opm index prune -p "prometheus" --from-index quay.io/operator-framework/example-index:1.0.0 --tag quay.io/operator-framework/example-index:1.0.1`

This would remove all but the `prometheus` package from the index.

#### export

`opm index export` will export a package from an index image into a directory. The format of this directory will match the appregistry manifest format: containing all versions of the package in the index along with a `package.yaml` file. This command takes an `--index` flag that points to an index image, a `--package` flag that states a package name, an optional `--download-folder` as the export location (default is `./downloaded`), and just as the other index commands it takes a `--container-tool` flag.

For example:

`opm index export --index="quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring:1.0.0" --package="prometheus" -c="podman"`

This will result in the following `downloaded` folder directory structure:

```bash
downloaded
├── 0.14.0
│   ├── alertmanager.crd.yaml
│   ├── prometheus.crd.yaml
│   ├── prometheusoperator.0.14.0.clusterserviceversion.yaml
│   ├── prometheusrule.crd.yaml
│   └── servicemonitor.crd.yaml
├── 0.15.0
│   ├── alertmanager.crd.yaml
│   ├── prometheus.crd.yaml
│   ├── prometheusoperator.0.15.0.clusterserviceversion.yaml
│   ├── prometheusrule.crd.yaml
│   └── servicemonitor.crd.yaml
├── 0.22.2
│   ├── alertmanager.crd.yaml
│   ├── prometheus.crd.yaml
│   ├── prometheusoperator.0.22.2.clusterserviceversion.yaml
│   ├── prometheusrule.crd.yaml
│   └── servicemonitor.crd.yaml
└── package.yaml
```

which can be pushed to appregistry.

**Note**: the appregistry format is being deprecated in favor of the new index image and image bundle format.

### External Container Tooling

Of note, many of these commands require some form of shelling to common container tooling. By default, the container tool that `opm` shells to is [podman](https://podman.io/). However, we also support overriding this via the `--container-tool`.

For example:

`opm index add --bundles quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.14.0 --tag quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring-index:1.0.0 --container-tool docker`

These commands require shelling to an external tool:

- `opm index add`
- `opm index rm`
- `opm index export`

### Self-Contained Container Tooling

There are a few commands that use self-contained container tooling. These commands do not require shelling to an external tool:

- `opm registry add`

#### Configuration

By default, the self-contained tooling uses the standard [Docker config](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/cli/#configuration-files) in the `~/.docker` directory. This can be changed by setting the `DOCKER_CONFIG` environment variable.

#### Authentication

Authentication options [can be added](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/login/#credentials-store) to the standard Docker config. The self-contained tooling should also be able to use the system credential store out-of-the-box.

Commit message:

opm registry add: add --ca-file to add a PEM to the cert pool used by the command
Signed-off-by: Eric Stroczynski <ericstroczynski@gmail.com>

Upstream-repository: operator-registry
Upstream-commit: 496ccce8f7ea2243fabc62cc05697faa68203e64

staging/operator-registry/docs/design/opm-tooling.md, after:

# Operator Registry Tooling

When compiled, the `operator-registry` project results in a collection of tools that in aggregate define a way of packaging and delivering operator manifests to Kubernetes clusters. Historically, this is done with multiple tools. For example, you can use `initializer` to generate an immutable database and then use `registry-serve` to serve the database via an API. We have added the `opm` tool that aggregates these functions together and allows a user to interact with container images and tooling directly to generate and update registry databases in a mutable way.

The following document describes the tooling that `opm` provides along with descriptions of how to use them including each command's purpose, their inputs and outputs, and some examples.

## opm

`opm` (Operator Package Manager) is a tool that is used to generate and interact with operator-registry catalogs, both the underlying databases (generally referred to as the `registry`) and their images (the `index`). This is divided into two main commands: `registry` which is used to initialize, update and serve an API of the underlying database of manifests and references and `index` which is used to interact with an OCI container runtime to generate the registry database and package it in a container image.

### registry

`opm registry` generates and updates registry database objects.

#### add

First, let's look at adding a version of an operator bundle to a registry database.

For example:

`opm registry add -b "quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.14.0" -d "test-registry.db"`

Dissecting this command, we called `opm registry add` to pull a container image that includes the manifests for the 0.14.0 version of the `prometheus` operator. We then unpacked those manifests from the container image and attempted to insert them into the registry database `test-registry.db`. Since that database file didn't currently exist on disk, the database was initialized first and then prometheus 0.14.0 was added to the empty database.

Now imagine that the 0.15.0 version of the `prometheus operator` was just released. We can add that operator to our existing database by calling add again and pointing to the new container image:

`opm registry add -b "quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.15.0" -d "test-registry.db"`

Great! The existing `test-registry.db` file is updated. Now we have a registry that contains two versions of the operator and defines an update graph that, when added to a cluster, will signal to the Operator Lifecycle Manager that if you have already installed version `0.14.0` that `0.15.0` can be used to upgrade your installation.

**Aside:** if using a custom CA for your bundle image registry, be sure to configure the container tool with the appropriate certificate
([docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/certificates/), [podman](http://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-image-sign.1.html#cert-dir-path)).
If using the `none` container tool, download the root certificate to a file and pass the file path like so:

```sh
opm registry add -b "custom-ca-registry.com/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.15.0" -d "test-registry.db" --container-tool=none --ca-file="/path/to/cert.pem"
```

#### rm

`opm` also currently supports removing entire packages from a registry.

For example:

`opm registry rm -o "prometheus" -d "test-registry.db"`

Calling this on our existing test registry removes all versions of the prometheus operator entirely from the database.

#### prune

`opm` supports specifying which packages should be kept in an operator database.

For example:

`opm registry prune -p "prometheus" -d "test-registry.db"`

Would remove all but the `prometheus` package from the operator database.

#### serve

`opm` also includes a command to connect to an existing database and serve a `gRPC` API that handles requests for data about the registry:

`opm registry serve -d "test-registry.db" -p 50051`

### index

`opm index` is, for the most part, a wrapper for `opm registry` that abstracts the underlying database interaction to instead make it easier to speak about the container images that are actually shipped to clusters directly. In particular, this makes it easy to say "given my operator index image, I want to add a new version of my operator and get an updated container image that I can automatically ship to clusters".

#### add

Index add works much the same way as registry add. For example:

`opm index add --bundles quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.14.0 --tag quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring-index:1.0.0`

Similar to `opm registry add`, this command will pull the specified container bundle and insert it into a registry. The real difference is that the result is more than just a database file. By default, this command will also attempt to build a container image and depending on the value of the `--tag` flag, will tag the output image as `quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring-index:1.0.0`. The resulting image has the database and the opm binary in it and, when run, calls the `registry serve` command on the database that was generated.

Just like registry add command, the updates are cumulative. In this case, rather than pointing at a database file, we can use the `--from-index` flag to specify a previous index to build off of a previous registry:

`opm index add --bundles quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.15.0 --from-index quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring:1.0.0 --tag quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring:1.0.1`

This results in a fresh image that includes the updated prometheus operator in the prometheus package's update graph.

At a high level, this command operates by wrapping `registry add` around some additional interaction with pulling and building container images. To that end, the last thing it does is actually shell out to a container CLI tool to build the resulting container (by default, `podman build`). It does this by generating a dockerfile and then passing that file to the shell command.

For example:

```dockerfile
FROM quay.io/operator-framework/upstream-registry-builder AS builder

FROM scratch
LABEL operators.operatorframework.io.index.database.v1=./index.db
COPY database ./
COPY --from=builder /bin/opm /opm
COPY --from=builder /bin/grpc_health_probe /bin/grpc_health_probe
EXPOSE 50051
ENTRYPOINT ["/opm"]
CMD ["registry", "serve", "--database", "index.db"]
```

In the above example, it's important to note that we use a builder image to get the latest upstream released version of opm in order to call `opm registry serve` to host the gRPC API. If a developer or CI system would prefer to point to a different version of `opm` to serve their operator (perhaps one in a private release or a fork) then they just need to deliver their own version in a container and then use the `--binary-image` command.

For example:

`opm index add --bundles quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.14.0 --tag quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring-index:1.0.0 --binary-image quay.io/$user/my-opm-source`

This will update the above dockerfile and replace the builder image with the image specified in the `--binary-image` flag.

We are aware of the fact that, in many cases, users will want to make other changes to this dockerfile (adding additional labels, adding other binaries for metrics, using a different port, etc.). For these more complex use cases, we have added the `--generate` and `--out-dockerfile` flags. Adding `--generate` will skip the container build command entirely and instead write a Dockerfile to the local filesystem. By default, this file is called `index.Dockerfile` and is put in the directory you run `opm` from. If you want to rename this generated dockerfile and write it somewhere else, just specify the `--out-dockerfile` flag:

`opm index add --bundles quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.14.0 --generate --out-dockerfile "my.Dockerfile"`

Running this command will still generate the updated registry database, but it will store it locally and additionally write `my.Dockerfile` which can be modified as needed.


#### Update Graph Generation

In an effort to make channel head selection understandable and deterministic when bulk-adding bundles to an index using `--mode=replaces` (the default), the following heuristic has been adopted: the bundles with the highest version within a package are considered the heads of the channels they belong to.

<ul>

#### Under the Hood

`opm` effectively decomposes bundle addition into three steps for each package:

1. Add bundles to the underlying data store
2. Choose the channel heads and default channel
3. Rebuild the update graph starting at the new heads

Channel head -- the "latest" operator in a channel -- selection is now informed by [semver](https://semver.org/). The heurstic is simple, the bundle with the highest version in each channel becomes the new head. The default channel is then taken from the maximum versioned bundle which defines a default channel.

Starting from these heads, opm then rebuilds the entire update graph using the edges defined by the `replaces` and `skips` CSV fields.

If a given CSV is missing a version field, all CSVs (sourced from the command's arguments) belonging package are elided from the input. Additionally, a non-zero exit code is returned from the command.
CSVs without a version (and with duplicate versions) that are already part of the index are allowed so long as there is at least one CSV with a version field in the package that we can recognize as having the maximum version.
When `--overwrite-latest` is set, all bundle in a package are deleted and passed in as "input", and thus are constrained by the rules set out in the first paragraph above; the exceptions set out in the second paragraph above do not apply, and violations cause the offending package to be excluded from the index.

#### What does this mean for a package author?

- the head of every channel will __always__ be the bundle in that channel with the highest version field defined
- a version field __must__ be defined on a bundle expected to be channel head, unless it's the only bundle in the channel

#### Common Pitfalls

- [Pre-release](https://semver.org/#spec-item-9) versions __should not__ be used as patches to channel heads; e.g. 1.0.0-p replaces 1.0.0
    - pre-release versions come _before_ their release version and consequently won't be chosen as the new channel head by opm (see https://semver.org/#spec-item-11 for more on ordering)
</ul>

#### rm

Like `opm registry rm`, this command will remove all versions an entire operator package from the index and results in a container image that does not include that package. It supports virtually all of the same options and flags as `opm index add` with the exception of replacing `--bundles` with `--operators`.

For example:

`opm index rm --operators prometheus --tag quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring-index:1.0.2 --binary-image quay.io/$user/my-opm-source`

This will result in the tagged container image `quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring-index:1.0.2` with a registry that no longer contains the `prometheus` operator at all.

#### prune

`opm index prune` allows the user to specify which operator packages should be maintained in an index.

For example:

`opm index prune -p "prometheus" --from-index quay.io/operator-framework/example-index:1.0.0 --tag quay.io/operator-framework/example-index:1.0.1`

This would remove all but the `prometheus` package from the index.

#### export

`opm index export` will export a package from an index image into a directory. The format of this directory will match the appregistry manifest format: containing all versions of the package in the index along with a `package.yaml` file. This command takes an `--index` flag that points to an index image, a `--package` flag that states a package name, an optional `--download-folder` as the export location (default is `./downloaded`), and just as the other index commands it takes a `--container-tool` flag.

For example:

`opm index export --index="quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring:1.0.0" --package="prometheus" -c="podman"`

This will result in the following `downloaded` folder directory structure:

```bash
downloaded
├── 0.14.0
│   ├── alertmanager.crd.yaml
│   ├── prometheus.crd.yaml
│   ├── prometheusoperator.0.14.0.clusterserviceversion.yaml
│   ├── prometheusrule.crd.yaml
│   └── servicemonitor.crd.yaml
├── 0.15.0
│   ├── alertmanager.crd.yaml
│   ├── prometheus.crd.yaml
│   ├── prometheusoperator.0.15.0.clusterserviceversion.yaml
│   ├── prometheusrule.crd.yaml
│   └── servicemonitor.crd.yaml
├── 0.22.2
│   ├── alertmanager.crd.yaml
│   ├── prometheus.crd.yaml
│   ├── prometheusoperator.0.22.2.clusterserviceversion.yaml
│   ├── prometheusrule.crd.yaml
│   └── servicemonitor.crd.yaml
└── package.yaml
```

which can be pushed to appregistry.

**Note**: the appregistry format is being deprecated in favor of the new index image and image bundle format.

### External Container Tooling

Of note, many of these commands require some form of shelling to common container tooling. By default, the container tool that `opm` shells to is [podman](https://podman.io/). However, we also support overriding this via the `--container-tool`.

For example:

`opm index add --bundles quay.io/operator-framework/operator-bundle-prometheus:0.14.0 --tag quay.io/operator-framework/monitoring-index:1.0.0 --container-tool docker`

These commands require shelling to an external tool:

- `opm index add`
- `opm index rm`
- `opm index export`

### Self-Contained Container Tooling

There are a few commands that use self-contained container tooling. These commands do not require shelling to an external tool:

- `opm registry add`

#### Configuration

By default, the self-contained tooling uses the standard [Docker config](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/cli/#configuration-files) in the `~/.docker` directory. This can be changed by setting the `DOCKER_CONFIG` environment variable.

#### Authentication

Authentication options [can be added](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/login/#credentials-store) to the standard Docker config. The self-contained tooling should also be able to use the system credential store out-of-the-box.
